First draft of the standard (#1)
IsEnesEval/diagstandards: standard.md

# The definition of the standard

As stated in the motivation, this standard aims to facilitate sharing the actual pieces
of code that analyze the data and produce the final results, hereafter called
'diagnostic scripts' or in short 'diagnostics' or 'scripts'. It is assumed that
those are able to be wrapped as standalone codes that can be run as independent
processes, an approach that has been successfully tested in different tools like
ESMValTool and CLIMAF.

## Glossary

There are three levels of definitions in this standard:

- **Must**: all diagnostic have to meet this conditions to comply with the standard.
- **Recommend**: diagnostics are encouraged to meet them but they are not mandatory. Nevertheless, if a list of compatible diagnostics is compiled, those who will meet them will be highlighted.

> - **Suggest**: they will never ve enforced, but the team consider them as nice to have. They mostly correspond to quality of life improvements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Suggest**: they will never ve enforced, but the team consider them as nice to have. They mostly correspond to quality of life improvements.
```
```suggestion
- **Suggest**: they will never be enforced, but they are considered nice to have. They mostly correspond to quality of life improvements.
```

> In the same way, when defining the content of the yaml files, three different levels of definitions are  used:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the same way, when defining the content of the yaml files, three different levels of definitions are used:
```

> In the same way, when defining the content of the yaml files, three different levels of definitions are  used:

Reviewer: What yaml files? It would be good to explain this

Reviewer 2: This is explained now, does it work for you?

> - **Required**: they must allways be present with the defined meaning and allowed values.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Required**: must always be present with the defined meaning and allowed values.
```

> - **Reserved**: they can be omitted, but in the case that are present, they must have the defined meaning and allowed values.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Reserved**: can be omitted, but if present, must have the defined meaning and allowed values.
```

- **Custom**: in all files, extra options can be added as needed by the diagnostics or the tools. The only requirement is that they do not collide with any `required` or `reserved` option.

## The command line interface

The diagnostic must be implemented as a command line tool that accepts a path to a yaml file as the only parameter.

It is recommended that the diagnostic executable can also be called with the `--help` option. The diagnostic should then print on the console the following help information:

- A small description of what the diagnostic does (recommended)

> - A list of the options defined by the diagnostic to configure it. It is recommended that this list comes with a small explanation of it's meaning and effects, the type of the expected values and any default values taken when they are not explicitly defined (recommended).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A list of the options defined by the diagnostic to configure it. It is recommended that this list comes with a small explanation of it's meaning and effects, the type of the expected values and any default values taken when they are not explicitly defined (recommended).
```
```suggestion
- A list of the options defined by the diagnostic to configure it. It is recommended that this list comes with a small explanation of its meaning and effects, the type of the expected values, and any default values used when the option is not explicitly defined (recommended).
```

- A list of the mandatory common options required for the diagnostic to work (recommended).
- A link to the online documentation, if available (suggested)

## The diagnostic configuration file

> This section will define the syntax fot he main configuration file. It must be a yaml file containing a dictionary that contains a dictionary with all the options needed by a diagnostic

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This section will define the syntax for the main configuration file. It must be a YAML file containing a mapping that contains a mapping with all the options needed by a diagnostic
```
this is called mapping in yaml, dictionary is the name used in Python

- **input_files**: `list`. List of absolute paths to the metadata files describing the data to be used by the diagnostic. The format of this files is defined later.
- **tool**: `str`. Name of the tool used to prepare the data for the diagnostic.
- **version**: `str` Version of the tool used to prepare the data for the diagnostic.
- **run_dir**: `str`. Path to the folder to use as current path for diagnostic execution. Must be writable by the diagnostic.
- **data_dir**: `str`. Path to the folder to store the  diagnostic's generated data on. Must be writable by the diagnostic.
- **plot_dir**: `str`. Path to the folder to store the  diagnostic's generated figures on. Must be writable by the diagnostic.

It is suggested to provide different folders for `run_dir`, `data_dir` and `plot_dir`, as it will be easier for the users to interact with the results, but the same folder can be used.

### Reserved options

The options listed in this file are not required for the diagnostics to implement, but if they do they must follow the following guidelines:

> - **write_plots**: `boolean`, default value is `true`. A flag to control if the diagnostic generates the associated figures with the results or not.

Reviewer: Are you sure you want to include this? We went through quite a bit of trouble with the ESMValTool to get this flag removed. Plots are small to store and fast to generate, so what is the point in adding an option to disable writing them?

Reviewer 3: I do not see any need for this keyword

Reviewer 2: It's removed now, since it was also deprecated form ESMValTool.

- **write_data**: `boolean`, default value is `true`. A flag to control if the diagnostic generates the associated data files with the results or not.
- **log_level**: `str`, default values is `info`. Sets the granularity of the diagnostic logs and console output. If used, diagnostic must accept at least `error` `warning`, `info` and `debug`
- **auxiliary_data_dir** : `str`. Path to the auxiliary directory where the diagnostic may find further input data.
- **max_proc_number** : `integer`, default value is **1**. The maximum number of processors that the tool allows the diagnostic to request

## The data definition file

> The data definition file must be a yaml file containing a dictionary of dictionaries. This first dictionary will have as keys the path to the data files and as values the dictionary containg the metadata of each file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The data definition file must be a YAML file containing a mapping of mappings. The top-level mapping will have as keys the path to the data files and as values, the mapping containing the metadata of each file.
```

> There is no limit to the number of file that can be provided on a single file, although it is suggested

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There is no limit to the number of input data files that can be provided on a single file, although it is suggested.
```

### Required options

- **alias**: `str`. Unique name for the dataset. Any (`alias`, `variable`) pair must be unique

> - **filename**: `str`. Absoulute path to the data file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **filename**: `str`. Absolute path to the data file.
```

- **variable**: `str`. Variable name to be used by the diagnostic. It does not have to match any of the CF conventions names in the file

### Reserved options

#### Related to the dataset

> - **project**: `str`. Name of the project at which this dataset belongs. It can be a real project, like `CMIP5`, `CMIP6` or a tool defined agrupation of datasets like `Observations` or `Reanalysis`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **project**: `str`. Name of the project to which this dataset belongs. It can be a real project, like `CMIP5`, `CMIP6` or a tool defined grouping of datasets like `Observations` or `Reanalysis`
```

- **activity**: `str`. CMIP activity or analog for the current data
- **institute**: `list(str)`. List of institutes associated to the current data.

> - **dataset**: `str`. Name of the dataset, being it the CMIP model indetifier, the name of an observation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **dataset**: `str`. Name of the dataset. For example: the CMIP model identifier, the name of an observational dataset, etc.
```

- **ensemble**: `str`. Ensemble identifier for the current data

> 

Reviewer: Add `experiment`?

Reviewer 2: Added

#### Related to the variable

> - **table**: `str`. Original mip of the current variable

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **table**: `str`. Original MIP table of the current variable
```

- **frequency**: `str`. Original frequency of the data used

> - **modeling_realm**: `list(str)`. List of realms at which the variable belonh

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **modeling_realm**: `str`. Realms to which the variable belongs
```
I would propose to make this a str, if there is more than one, the tool providing the input data should concatenate this in a meaningful way so they can be used in a figure caption

- **grid**: `str`. Original grid of the variable
- **units**: `str`. Units of the data
- **short_name**: `str`. Variable name used in the file.
- **standard_name**: `str`. Standard name of the variable.
- **long_name**: `str`. Long name of the variable

#### Others

- **start**: `str`. Starting date of the data, in the format YYYYMMDD
- **end**: `str`, Ending date of the data, in the format YYYYMMDD
- **start_year**: `int`. Starting year of the data
- **end_year**: `int`. End year of the data

> - **reference_dataset**: `str`. Dataset to be used as the reference to compare the current dataset with, given as the alias.

Reviewer: Should this be part of the standard?

Reviewer 2: It's an optional parameter, I think that the idea is to give a way to name these datasets that are going to be used as reference.

> ## The script formal description file

Reviewer: I like the idea of having a standardized description file, how about adding information like
- title
- description
- references
- authors
- URL with more information

Reviewer 3: I agree, and suggested earlier that most (all?) info given by the --help option could be moved to this file. If needed, a formatter would output in in a fancier way.

Reviewer 3: It would be nice to assemble a cleaner version of standard.md with approved suggestions taken into account, because growing the stack of comments now leads to difficult interactions, and we are now in a quite fuzzy state

Reviewer 2: Added

> It is recommended that each script comes with a description file in yaml syntax which includes :

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is recommended that each script comes with a description file in YAML syntax which includes:
```

> - **script_name**: `str`. A label for the name of the script, which uniquely identifies it, and is delivered by an authoritative entity (such as an ESGF, ENES or WCRP entitiy)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **script_name**: `str`. A label for the name of the script, which uniquely identifies it, and is delivered by an authoritative entity (such as an ESGF, ENES, or WCRP entity)
```
Is there a provider of such names? This will be difficult to implement without one of those.

- **script_interface_version**: `str`. A label for distinguishing among various version of the script interface

> -  **mandatory_keys**: `list(str)`. the list of reserved and custom keys for which the tool must provide values

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **mandatory_keys**: `list(str)`. the list of reserved and custom keys for which the tool must provide values
```

> - **input_type**: `str`. which can take values 'member', 'ensemble' and 'any', and which allows the tool to check that values provided to the script are of the right type. 'ensemble' means : an ensemble with more than one member, while 'any' allows for an ensemble of size 1. If the type differs among the variables, this entry can be a dictionary with key = variable name

Reviewer: Could you explain why you think this is needed? From the current text, I do not understand what values are checked and how this helps with checking those.

Reviewer 3: Distinguishing between 'member' and 'ensemble' allows the tool to nicely handle ensembles : when a script of type 'member' is applied to an ensemble, the tool automatically loops on applying the script to each member, and builds a resulting ensemble object with all member results. This of course make sense only for tools which include ensemble objects, and which actually handle script outputs.
Category 'any' is not instrumental, let us forget about it.

Reviewer 2: I agree with @bouweandela, I found the name `input_type` to be confusing.

Reviewer 3: As far as I understand, @bouweandela was not objecting on the key name, but on the key use. I am flexible about the key name

Reviewer 2: Well I found the meaning a bit confusing as well. But after reading your explanation and how `input_type` is only needed for tools that include ensemble objects, maybe `input_type` (and `can_select` for that matter) could be given as examples of `mandatory_keys`. Rather than having their own entry, since it's information that only needs to be present for certain tools.

Reviewer 3: It really cannot be an example of a mandatory key, as it is not a value that would change among script calls; it is rather a property of the script.
I propose to rename the key and change the description to make things more clear : 

> **process_ensembles**: `bool` (optional, defaults to True). Tells the tool if the script can process ensembles. If false, and when the script is to be applied to an ensemble, some tools may take in charge a loop on ensemble members. Please refer to tool documentation.

If the standard interface is to be used by more than one tool, allowing for defining this keyword is instrumental. 

Because I suggest that the key is optional and that the default value matches ESMValTool's behaviour, this has no detrimental impact on ESMValTool.

Reviewer 3: It really cannot be an example of a mandatory key, as it is not a value that would change among script calls; it is rather a property of the script.
I propose to rename the key and change the description to make things more clear : 

> **process_ensembles**: `bool` (optional, defaults to True). Tells the tool if the script can process ensembles. If false, and when the script is to be applied to an ensemble, some tools may take in charge a loop on ensemble members. Please refer to tool documentation.

If the standard interface is to be used by more than one tool, allowing for defining this keyword is instrumental. 

Because I suggest that the key is optional and that the default value matches ESMValTool's behaviour, this has no detrimental impact on ESMValTool.

Reviewer 2: To me they don't seem as standard settings, but rather something very specific to certain tools so I am not sure they should be considered as an standard. 

I am adding them as optional settings as suggested, but maybe it's something that at some point should be revised.

With that, if the wording works for you, I would try to have to have this first draft merged so that the issues can be taken care of.

Reviewer 3: > To me they don't seem as standard setting**s** .. I am adding **them**..

Are we referring to more than one setting ? For me, we refer only to `input_type`. 

I prefer that we change the wording to the last one that I proposed , namely :

> **process_ensembles**: `bool` (optional, defaults to True). Tells the tool if the script can process ensembles. If false, and when the script is to be applied to an ensemble, some tools may take in charge a loop on ensemble members. Please refer to tool documentation.

Reviewer 2: >Are we referring to more than one setting ? For me, we refer only to input_type.

I think we have a similar situation with `can_select`. See https://github.com/IsEnesEval/diagstandards/pull/1#discussion_r747429301

Reviewer 3: For me, it would be much detrimental to the standard if it didn't allow the resources efficiency that `can_select` brings

Reviewer 2: It is included in the standard. Just as an optional parameter.

Reviewer 3: OK. [Just below](https://github.com/IsEnesEval/diagstandards/pull/1#discussion_r798723745), I propose to forget about `can_select` and `outputs`; i now propose the same for `process_ensembles`

> - **outputs**:`dict`. A dictionary of patterns  which allows the tool to discover every output file and to assign a label to it. The patterns and the labels used as dictionary keys  can make use of keywords 'variable', 'dataset' and 'reference_dataset'; the tool may instantiate the keywords with all possible values to form file basenames and test whether a corresponding file exists in scripts output directories; dictionary values can be pairs, in which case, the second element of the pair allows for providing a pattern for indicating the output variable's short_name

Reviewer: I'm not sure if this is the right approach, diagnostic developers may struggle to give their output files the names they would like and may be unable to provide useful metadata about the output files. I would rather go for a standard output metadata format, e.g. the same or very similar to the input metadata format. I would recommend adding things like caption, authors, references, input files used, etc like we do in the ESMValCore: https://docs.esmvaltool.org/projects/esmvalcore/en/latest/interfaces.html#information-provided-by-the-diagnostic-script-to-esmvalcore

Reviewer 3: If the tool has no way to predict the list of possible script output files (and to name them) without running the script, it cannot implement a cache of script results (because he must run the script anyway)
This is a basic shortcoming of ESMValTool

Reviewer 3: > diagnostic developers may struggle to give their output files the names they would like

This appears self-contradictory

Reviewer 3: See #11 for continuing the discussion about how to describe script's outputs

Reviewer 3: #11 is now closed, suggesting to discard key `outputs`

> - **can_select** : `bool`. Tells the tool whether the script is able to select data in input data files, in term of variable selection and time period selection. Defaults to **False**

Reviewer: Could you explain why you feel this is needed? I do not understand the purpose of this

Reviewer 3: In use cases where the pre-processing by the tool only includes selecting a time period, and the requested period represents most part of the period covered by the input datafiles, the actual effect of the pre-processing can just be to copy all input datafiles; this is less efficient than letting the script extract the requested time period from the input datafiles itself, when it is able to (thus avoiding copying big files).

Reviewer 2: @bouweandela Does this explanation convince you?

Reviewer: Not really. What if the input data needs fixes?

Reviewer 3: > Not really. What if the input data needs fixes?

This remark is not relevant to interface definition, but only to basic assumptions about tool(s) design, which is topic that has been overlooked here. 

And, as a mater of fact, there is a lot of implicit assumptions about tool design in the present draft. So bad that we do not have time to sort them, now.

But we can forget about `can_select` and `outputs` keys. See that [remark](https://github.com/IsEnesEval/diagstandards/issues/11#issuecomment-1029138928)

- **input_type**: `str`. Possible values are: `member`, `ensemble` or `any`. Allows the tool to check if values provided to the script have the right type.
An `ensemble` can be defined as an ensemble with more than one member, while `any` allows for an ensemble of size 1. If the type differs among the variables, this entry can be a dictionary defined as {'key': 'variable name'}.
- **outputs**:`dict`. Dictionary of patterns with the purpose of allowing the tool to discover every output file and to assign a label to it. The patterns and the labels used as dictionary keys  can make use of keywords `variable`, `dataset` and `reference_dataset`. The tool may substitute the keywords with all possible values to form file basenames and test whether a corresponding file exists in the script's output directories. Dictionary values can be defined as pairs, in which the second element of the pair is a pattern to indicate the 'short_name' of the output variable.
- **can_select** : `bool`. Determines whether the script in input data files, in term of variable selection and time period selection. Defaults to **False**.

> - If available, an URL to the online documentation.

Reviewer 3: Should introduce a key for the URL

Reviewer 2: Sure, done.

with the purpose of facilitating the sharing of source codes used to
analyze climate data and produce evaluation results and figures. 
Said codes will hereafter be referred as 'diagnostic scripts', or in short 'diagnostics'
or 'scripts'. 

It is assumed that diagnostic scripts are able to be wrapped
as standalone codes that run as independent processes, an approach that
has been successfully tested in tools such as ESMValTool and CLiMAF.
It also assumes that diagnostic scripts are able to read CF compliant NetCDF
data files and to produce output files with formats such as NetCDF, CVS, txt,
or excel spreadsheets; as well as graphic files.

## Glossary

This standard defines three tiers of enforceability for the guidelines to share diagnostics:

- **Must**: guidelines that all diagnostics have to meet to comply with the standard.
- **Recommend**: guidelines that all diagnostics are encouraged to meet, but are not mandatory.
Nevertheless, if a list of compatible diagnostics is compiled, diagnostic scripts meeting
recommended guidelines will be highlighted.
- **Suggest**: guidelines that are not required, but are considered to improve the quality of the diagnostics.

> Diagnostic scripts are expected to be contributed along with a YAML file containing configuration options.

Reviewer 3: I do not understand this sentence. I would understand that scripts are contributed with a **formal description file**. But the configuration file described below is not a contributed one. And the enforceability levels defined just below apply to the configuration file

Reviewer 2: It has been like this since the first commit. The formal description file is considered a recommended contribution to complete this configuration file.

Reviewer 3: Yes. What I mean is that it is ambiguous to write that the description file contains **configuration** options while, in the same time, naming another file the **configuration** file

Reviewer 2: Thanks for the explanation, I removed any mention of configuration options in the fromal description file section. Hope that works for you.

This standard defines three different levels of enforceability for the contents of this YAML file:

- **Required**: parameters that must always be present, have a defined meaning and that can only take allowed values.
- **Reserved**: parameters that can be omitted, but if present, must have a defined meaning and allowed values.
- **Custom**: extra parameters can be defined as needed by the diagnostics or the tools.
They must not collide with neither `required` nor `reserved` parameters.

## The diagnostic configuration file

The diagnostic's configuration file *must* consist of YAML file containing key-value mappings for all the parameters needed to run the diagnostic.

### Required options

The following options *must* be present in the configuration file:

- **diagnostic_path** : `str`. Path to the diagnostic executable.
- **input_files**: `list`. List of absolute paths to the metadata files describing the data to be used by the diagnostic.

> The format of these files is especified in section [The data definition file](the-data-definition-file).

Reviewer 3: Here, we miss an explanation : there are multiple metadata files, and each one describe multiple data files, so, which is the grouping principle ? As far as I understand, it is implicitly the variable, but what is written does not enforce it.

Reviewer 2: Added

# Definition of the standard

This document intends to define a standard
with the purpose of facilitating the sharing of source codes used to
analyze climate data and produce evaluation results and figures. 
Said codes will hereafter be referred as 'diagnostic scripts', or in short 'diagnostics'
or 'scripts'. 

It is assumed that diagnostic scripts are able to be wrapped
as standalone codes that run as independent processes, an approach that
has been successfully tested in tools such as ESMValTool and CLiMAF.
It also assumes that diagnostic scripts are able to read CF compliant NetCDF

> data files and to produce only the same kind of output files and graphic files.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
data files.
```
I have no clue what that means, do you?

Reviewer 3: It means :

> data files and to produce only NetCDF and graphic output files.

Reviewer: In the ESMValTool we have several diagnostics that produce other output: CSV files, text files, Excel spreadsheets, etc. If this is what scientists would like their diagnostic to produce, why not let them?

Reviewer 3: Fine. Should then state that any output kind is allowed.

- **version**: `str` Version of the tool used to prepare the data for the diagnostic.
- **run_dir**: `str`. Path to the directory to use as current path for the diagnostic execution. *Must* be writable by the diagnostic.
- **data_dir**: `str`. Path to the directory to store the  diagnostic's generated data on. *Must* be writable by the diagnostic.
- **plot_dir**: `str`. Path to the directory to store the  diagnostic's generated figures on. *Must* be writable by the diagnostic.

It is *suggested* to provide different directory names for `run_dir`, `data_dir` and `plot_dir`, as it makes the interaction with the results
easier. However, using the same directory for all purposes is accepted.

### Reserved options

The following options are not required, however if present they must follow the definitions listed below:

- **log_level**: `str`, default value is `info`. Sets the granularity of the diagnostic logs and console output.
If used, the logger must include `error` `warning`, `info` and `debug` levels .
- **auxiliary_data_dir** : `str`. Path to the auxiliary directory to store further input data files needed by the diagnostic, such as shapefiles.

> - **max_proc_number** : `integer`, default value is **1**. Maximum number of processors used to run the diagnostic.

Reviewer: Most diagnostic developers will probably not have the technical skills to implement code that respects this setting. Therefore I'm not sure if this is a good idea because it will result in diagnostics that are broken.

Reviewer 2: It's under this section though:

`The following options are not required, however if present they must follow the definitions listed below`

Reviewer 2: Maybe there are external tools that use multiple preprocessors, so having a name for this option is useful in that case. But anyway if it only adds confusion I can delete it.

Reviewer 3: > Most diagnostic developers will probably not have the technical skills to implement code that respects this setting

The quite easy way to respect the setting is to avoid using more than one processor, which is the default behaviour of most packages that diagnostic developers may use.

Reviewer: Not the packages ESMValTool diagnostic developers use. Our Python diagnostic developers mostly use iris or xarray, both of which are based on dask which uses multiple processors by default. There are also other libraries that will use multiple processors by default. We also have several diagnostics written in R, some of the dependencies of these also use multiple processors by default.

Reviewer 3: FIne. Let us forget about max_proc_number

- **filename**: `str`. Absolute path to the data file.
- **variable**: `str`. Variable name to be used in the diagnostic. It is not necessary to follow CF conventions naming for variables.

### Reserved options

#### Related to the dataset

- **project**: `str`. Name of the project to which a dataset belongs. It can be a real project, (e.g. `CMIP5`, `CMIP6`) or a tool-defined grouping of datasets
(e.g. `Observations` or `Reanalysis`).
- **activity**: `str`. CMIP activity, or analog, of a dataset.
- **institute**: `str`. Name of the institute producing a dataset.
- **dataset**: `str`. Name of the dataset. For example: the CMIP model identifier, the name of an observational dataset, etc.
- **experiment**: `str`. Label to identify the experiment a dataset belongs to. (e.g `historical`, `piControl`).
- **ensemble**: `str`. Ensemble identifier of a dataset.

#### Related to the variable

- **table**: `str`. Variable's original MIP table.
- **original_frequency**: `str`. Variable's original frequency.
- **frequency**: `str`. Variable's frequency when entering the diagnostic.
- **modeling_realm**: `str`. Realms a variable belongs to.

> - **grid**: `str`. Variable's original grid.

Reviewer: I think this means the CMIP6 grid label, not the actual grid, right? It would be good to write this down more clearly.

Reviewer 2: done

- **units**: `str`. Variable's units.
- **short_name**: `str`. Variable's name used in the file as given by CF conventions.
- **standard_name**: `str`. Standard name of the variable as given by CF conventions.

> - **long_name**: `str`. Long name of the variable as given by CF conventions.

Reviewer: Are short_name and long_name prescribed by the CF conventions? Or only by the CMIP data request?

Reviewer 2: changed

#### Others

- **start**: `str`. Starting date of the data, given in ISO 8601 format for dates (YYYYMMDD).
- **end**: `str`, Ending date of the data, in ISO 8601 format for dates (YYYYMMDD).
- **start_year**: `int`. Starting year of the data.
- **end_year**: `int`. End year of the data.
- **reference_dataset**: `str`. Alias of the dataset to be used as the reference for comparisons.

## The script formal description file

It is *recommended* that each script comes with a description file in YAML syntax which includes information regarding: documentation, configuration of script, and optional settings.

The following labels should be provided in order to complete the documentation section:

- **title**: `str`. Label for the title of the diagnostic.
- **description** `str`. A short description of the diagnostic.
- **references** `list(str)`. List of references to be cited if using the diagnostic.
- **authors** `list(str)`. List of authors that developed the diagnostic.
- **read_more**: `url`. An URL to the online documentation.

The labels listed below should be provided in order to complete the configuration of the script:

> - **script_name**: `str`. Label for the name of the script, which uniquely identifies it, and is delivered by an authoritative entity (such as ESGF, ENES, or WCRP)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **script_name**: `str`. Name of the script, which uniquely identifies it
```
I don't think an entity exists which will issue script names, does it?

Reviewer 3: I agree :  we need one. But we could make explicit which is the domain of validity of such names; is it only a tool-specific and tool-managed register ?

Reviewer 2: > is it only a tool-specific and tool-managed register ?

I think that is as much as we could impose right now. That the name of the script has to be unique at a tool's level.

Reviewer 3: Fine !

Reviewer 2: Added. And maybe the need of an official registry of script names given by authoritative entities names is something that could be mentioned in the conclusions of the deliverable.

> - **script_interface_version**: `str`. Label to specify the version of the script interface.

Reviewer: Good idea to give the interface a version number. That should probably also go into the other two YAML files?

Reviewer 2: I added it as well to the diagnostic configuration file. But I am not sure if it also belongs to the data definition file.

> - **mandatory_keys**: `list(str)`. List of reserved and custom keys for which the tool *must* provide values

Reviewer: Nice to have this, it would be even better if there was something like a schema to validate these settings, e.g. valid ranges, choices for parameters

Reviewer: Do we also allow optional keys?

Reviewer 2: added

> - **outputs**:`dict`. Dictionary of patterns with the purpose of allowing the tool to discover every output file and to assign a label to it. The patterns and the labels used as dictionary keys  can make use of keywords `variable`, `dataset` and `reference_dataset`. The tool may substitute the keywords with all possible values to form file basenames and test whether a corresponding file exists in the script's output directories. Dictionary values can be defined as pairs, in which the second element of the pair is a pattern to indicate the 'short_name' of the output variable.

Reviewer: Let's first complete the discussion on this topic in #11, before including it in the standard

> The following labels are accepted as optional settings, as certain tools may require their definition. Nevertheless, they can be ommitted if not relevant to the tool's configuration.

Reviewer: Note that allowing optional parameters puts a burden on diagnostic developers, because they have to cater for the case where these are not provided in the input settings. This is a potential source of bugs in diagnostic scripts.

Reviewer 3: There is a misunderstanding : this section (script formal description) is a static file, not a file that changes for every script all

- **process_ensembles**: `bool`. Tells the tool if the script can process ensembles, defaults to **True**. If **False**, and when the script is to be applied to an ensemble, some tools may take in charge a loop over ensemble members. 
- **can_select** : `bool`. Tells the tool whether the script is able to select data in input data files, in term of variable selection and time period selection. Defaults to **False**.

## The command line interface

The diagnostic *must* be implemented as a command line tool that accepts the path to the

> YAML configuration file as the only parameter.

Reviewer: It may be useful to allow extra parameters, as we do for ESMValTool Python diagnostic scripts. Maybe this can be made less restrictive?

Reviewer 3: Is it an alternate way (w.r.t. providing key-vaue pairs in the interface file) ? And what about key conflicts between both sources, then ?

Reviewer: We provide some command-line flags that can be used when re-running diagnostic scripts. These can be used to either empty the output directory before running the script or keep it as is. And then there is the `--help` flag of course.

Reviewer 3: Shouldn'it be documented in the standard ?

Reviewer 2: Added

# The definition of the standard

## Glossary

There are three levels of definitions in this standard:

- **Must**: all diagnostic have to meet this conditions to comply with the standard.
- **Recommend**: diagnostics are encouraged to meet them but they are not mandatory. Nevertheless, if a list of compatible diagnostics is compiled, those who will meet them will be highlighted.
- **Suggest**: they will never ve enforced, but the team consider them as nice to have. They mostly correspond to quality of life improvements.

In the same way, when defining the content of the yaml files, three different levels of definitions are  used:

- **Required**: they must allways be present with the defined meaning and allowed values.

> - **Reserved**: they can be omitted, but in the case that are present, they must have the defined meaning and allowed values.

Reviewer 3: Should all diagnostics be resilient to the lack of value for a 'reserved' key ? Or should each diag declare which keywords are mandatory for it ? see below 'formal description file')

Author: I don't think all of them should be able to go without the reserved keys they needed. Remember that we are just defining them to avoid confusion and that, even for most diagnostic they will be informative, for others they may be key information (I am thinking of a diagnostic to compare members within a single simulation, for example)

Author: Another thing I think i will add to this is that diagnostic should be resilient to the presence of reserved keys that they do not use. That ways tools can add all the reserved keys they want without the fear of diags failing because of that. That will be handy for metadata

Reviewer 3: Fine for me

> - **Custom**: in all files, extra options can be added as needed by the diagnostics or the tools. The only requirement is that they do not collide with any `required` or `reserved` option.

Reviewer 3: Can we add that custom keys type is `str` ?

Author: I don't think so. One of the advantages of using yaml is that it directly supports numbers and boolean values, and I think lot's of custom keys will be numeric thresholds and boolean toggles

Reviewer 2: @senesis does this explanation convince you?

Reviewer 3: Fine

> 

Reviewer 3: Suggest adding paragraph : 
## The script formal description file

It is recommended that each script comes with a description file in yaml syntax which includes : 
- **script_name**: a label for the name of the script, which uniquely identifies it, and is delivered by an authoritative entity (such as an ESGF, ENES or WCRP entitiy)
- **script_interface_version**: a label for distinguishing among various version of the script interface 
-  **mandatory_keys**: the list of reserved and custom keys for which the tool must provide values
- **input_type** : which can take values 'member', 'ensemble' and 'any', and which allows the tool to check that values provided to the script are of the right type. 'ensemble' means : an ensemble with more than one member, while 'any' allows for an ensemble of size 1. If the type differs among the variables, this entry can be a dictionary with key = variable name
- **outputs**: a dictionary of patterns  which allows the tool to discover every output file and to assign a label to it. The patterns and the labels used as dictionary keys  can make use of keywords 'variable', 'dataset' and 'reference_dataset'; the tool may instantiate the keywords with all possible values to form file basenames and test whether a corresponding file exists in scripts output directories; dictionary values can be pairs, in which case, the second element of the pair allows for providing a pattern for indicating the output variable's short_name
- **can_select** : True/**False** : tells the tool whether the script is able to select data in input data files, in term of variable selection and time period selection

> 

Reviewer 3: Suggest to also add another paragraph, even before
## Basic assumptions about cross-plugging diagnostics among tools
This proposal assumes that the objective is to share those pieces of code which are the most expensive in term of climate scientists' development and tuning time, and the most sensitive with regard to scientific correctness, and that such pieces of code can be organized as independent codes launched as independent processes. This is actually the case for ESMValTool and CliMAF
It also assumes that such codes, hereafter called 'diagnostic scripts' or in short 'diagnostics' or 'scripts', work of CF compliant NetCDF format data files and produces only the same kind of files and graphic files.

Author: I will extend this in the motivation section and then add a small paragraph and a reference here for clarity

Reviewer 2: This is already specified in `Definition of the standard`

## The command line interface

The diagnostic must be implemented as a command line tool that accepts a path to a yaml file as the only parameter.

> It is recommended that the diagnostic executable can also be called with the `--help` option. The diagnostic should then print on the console the following help information:

Reviewer 3: Material below could also go in the 'script formal description file'. Or we could combine both set of information

Author: That's a good idea. I will take a look at how to combine it

Reviewer 2: > Material below could also go in the 'script formal description file'. Or we could combine both set of information.

Sorry, it's not very clear to me what do you mean in here.

Reviewer 3: The material that could go in the 'script formal description file' is what is presently supposed to be displayed when invoking the script with the --help argument, namely : 

- A short description of the diagnostic (recommended).
- A list describing possible configuration options, as well as expected and default values for each option (recommended).
- A list of the mandatory common options required for the diagnostic to work (recommended).
- A link to the online documentation, if available (suggested).

- A small description of what the diagnostic does (reccomended)
- A list of the options defined by the diagnostic to configure it. It is recommended that this list comes with a small explanation of it's meaning and effects, the type of the expected values and any default values taken when they are not explivitly defined (recommended).
- A list of the mandatory common options required for the diagnostic to work (recommended).
- A link to the online documentation, if available (suggested)

## The diagnostic configuration file

This section will define the syntax fot he main configuration file. It must be a yaml file containing a dictionary that contains a dictionary with all the options needed by a diagnostic

### Required options

The following options must be present in the configuration file passed to the diagnostic.

> 

Reviewer 3: adding also the path for the diagnostic executable could be useful, as it allows for a re-run independently of the tool, just using a simple driver !
- **diagnostic_path** : path to the diagnostic executable

- **input_files**: `list`. List of absolute paths to the metadata files describing the data to be used by the diagnostic. The format of this files is defined later.
- **tool**: `str`. Name of the tool used to prepare the data for the diagnostic.

> - **version**: `str` Version of the tool used to prepare the data for the diagnostic.

Reviewer 3: - **auxiliary_dir** : `str`. Path to the auxiliary directory where the diagnostic may find further input data, usually fixed data.
 (I feel it useful)

Author: We have something similar in ESMValTool, in that case is mostly to provide shapefiles and such.

Do you think we need this as required or it will be enough to left it as reserved?

Reviewer 3: 'Reserved' is fine

Reviewer 2: Added in reserverd

- **data_dir**: `str`. Path to the folder to store the  diagnostic's generated data on. Must be writable by the diagnostic.
- **plot_dir**: `str`. Path to the folder to store the  diagnostic's generated figures on. Must be writable by the diagnostic.

It is suggested to provide different folders for `run_dir`, `data_dir` and `plot_dir`, as it will be easier for the users to interact with the results, but the same folder can be used.

### Reserved options

The options listed in this file are not required for the diagnostics to implement, but if they do they must follow the following guidelines:

- **write_plots**: `boolean`, default value is `true`. A flag to control if the diagnostic generates the associated figures with the results or not.
- **write_data**: `boolean`, default value is `true`. A flag to control if the diagnostic generates the associated data files with the results or not.
- **log_level**: `str`, default values is `info`. Sets the granularity of the diagnostic logs and console output. If used, diagnostic must accept at least `error` `warning`, `info` and `debug`

> 

Reviewer 3: - **max_proc_number** : `integer`, default value is 1. The maximum number of processors that the tool allows the diagnostic to request

## The data definition file

The data definition file must be a yaml file containing a dictionary of dictionaries. This first dictionary will have as keys the path to the data files and as values the dictionary containg the metadata of each file.

There is no limit to the number of file that can be provided on a single file, although it is suggested

### Required options

- **alias**: `str`. Unique name for the dataset. Any (`alias`, `variable`) pair must be unique
- **filename**: `str`. Absoulute path to the data file.

> - **variable**: `str`. Variable name to be used by the diagnostic.

Reviewer 3: Should be clarified w.r.t short_name. Especially for the case where short_name is not provided, should the varable name be considered as the NetCDF variable name to take form the file ?
By the way, how is `varname` used when `short_name` is also provided ?

Author: This is a quirck of ESMValTool that sometimes is useful. It is mostly used to get two instances of the same variable that have been preprocessed differently.

For example, if you want to produce an index made of the difference of the tas mean in two boxes, you can have two vars `tas-box1` `tas-box2` that are in fact tas in two different places.

We do not change the name in the file, though, so we need to keep track of both. I am not sure if this is good behaviour or not, I can see arguments for both

Reviewer 3: This raises a more basic question : how do the tool and the diag script agree on which data file produced by the tool matches  which data file expected by the diag. This is quite ambiguous in ESMValTool and in the current draft. 

I understand here that, as a basis, the `short_name` is used for that, and,  if ambiguous, the `variable` is then used. But it is a bit tricky.

I would prefer that the match is ensured by ordering the input files listed in the main yaml file (this would also allow scripts to avoid having to dig in input files for finding which is what)

The other possibility is that we rename `variable` in `input_field_id` to better show that this attribute is used for the match. This implies that diags doc must list the input_field_ids they use, and describe the corresponding expected inputs

### Reserved options

#### Related to the dataset

- **project**: `str`. Name of the project at which this dataset belongs. It can be a real project, like `CMIP5`, `CMIP6` or a tool defined agrupation of datasets like `Observations` or `Reanalysis`
- **activity**: `str`. CMIP activity or analog for the current data

> - **institute**: `list(str)`. List of institutes associated to the current data.

Reviewer 3: Do you know of a dataset that is produced by more than one institute? Isnt'it an ESMValTool artifact ?

Author: From the cmip6 tables:

```yaml
"CESM1-WACCM-SC":{
                "activity_participation":[
                    "PAMIP"
                ],
                "cohort":[
                    "Registered"
                ],
                "institution_id":[
                    "UCI",
                    "NCAR"
                ],
                "source_id":"CESM1-WACCM-SC",
                "source":"CESM1-WACCM-SC (2011): \naerosol: MOZART-specified (same grid as atmos)\natmos: WACCM4 (1.9x2.5 finite volume grid; 144 x 96 longitude/latitude; 66 levels; top level 5.9e-06 mb)\natmosChem: MOZART-specified (same grid as atmos)\nland: CLM4.0\nlandIce: none\nocean: POP2 (320 x 384 longitude/latitude; 60 levels; top grid cell 0-10 m)\nocnBgchem: BEC (same grid as ocean)\nseaIce: CICE4 (same as grid as ocean)"
            },

"E3SM-1-1":{
                "activity_participation":[
                    "C4MIP",
                    "CMIP",
                    "LS3MIP"
                ],
                "cohort":[
                    "Registered"
                ],
                "institution_id":[
                    "E3SM-Project",
                    "RUBISCO"
                ],
                "source_id":"E3SM-1-1",
                "source":"E3SM 1.1 (2019): \naerosol: MAM4 with resuspension, marine organics, and secondary organics (same grid as atmos)\natmos: EAM (v1.1, cubed sphere spectral-element grid; 5400 elements with p=3; 1 deg average grid spacing; 90 x 90 x 6 longitude/latitude/cubeface; 72 levels; top level 0.1 hPa)\natmosChem: Troposphere specified oxidants for aerosols. Stratosphere linearized interactive ozone (LINOZ v2) (same grid as atmos)\nland: ELM (v1.1, same grid as atmos; active biogeochemistry using the Converging Trophic Cascade plant and soil carbon and nutrient mechanisms to represent carbon, nitrogen and phosphorus cycles), MOSART (v1.1, 0.5 degree latitude/longitude grid)\nlandIce: none\nocean: MPAS-Ocean (v6.0, oEC60to30 unstructured SVTs mesh with 235160 cells and 714274 edges, variable resolution 60 km to 30 km; 60 levels; top grid cell 0-10 m)\nocnBgchem: BEC (Biogeochemical Elemental Cycling model, NPZD-type with C/N/P/Fe/Si/O; same grid as ocean)\nseaIce: MPAS-Seaice (v6.0; same grid as ocean)"
            },
```

We found this in ESMValTool the hard way: we were assuming a single institute and then we started reading this info and everything blow up.

Reviewer 3: OK. I rather meant that diagnostic scripts are rather fed with what could be called a CMIP6-minded dataset (i.e. a dataset which defines the model, the experiment, the variable, the member, the version, the grid ...)  than with an ESMValTool-minded dataset (which does not necessarily define the variable). In that context, I think that you cannot encounter a dataset which has multiple institutes.

Reviewer 3: Further, even if a CMIP6 model may be run by multiple institutes, this doesn't mean that a dataset can be produced by multiple institutes. The CMIP6 publisher software wouldn't allow for that

Reviewer 2: > Further, even if a CMIP6 model may be run by multiple institutes, this doesn't mean that a dataset can be produced by multiple institutes. The CMIP6 publisher software wouldn't allow for that.

With that in mind, I changed the type to `str` .

- **dataset**: `str`. Name of the dataset, being it the CMIP model indetifier, the name of an observation
- **ensemble**: `str`. Ensemble identifier for the current data

#### Related to the variable

> - **mip**: `str`. Original mip of the current variable

Reviewer 3: ESMValTool use CMOR table name values for this keyword. If this is a reserved keyword, it should have a more shared meaning. Rename it 'table' ?

Reviewer: See https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValCore/issues/834 for previous discussion on the point, maybe it's time we do something with that issue

Reviewer 3: According to @jvegasbsc , the standard under definition should not be applicable immediately to ESMValTool, so I suggest not to bother with ESMValTool development schedule here. But the will of ESMValTool to move on that point at a later stage is certainly an interesting information

Author: Table is better

> - **frequency**: `str`. Original frequency of the data used

Reviewer 3: Why should it be the **original** frequency ? I think that the diagnostic is only interested by the actual frequency available downstream of the pre-processing.

Reviewer 2: Would it work for you to have both `frequency` and `original_frequency`?

Reviewer 3: yes
